Bartholomew 1
Luke S. Bartholomew
Mrs. Toribio
English 2
February 9 2018
Cassius, A True Tragic Hero

	Cassius was a well known, respected member of the Senate, who saw his tragic fall of fate in Julius Caesar. The assassination of Julius Caesar caused great trouble for the perpetrators of the act and Cassius shared in the fate as much as any of the others. Though it was his idea, an honorable, glorious, deed to be remembered and sung by the generations to come. He lost control of the mission to a close associate of his, more respected Senator, who though his honorable intentions, inadvertently caused the plan to fail. Cassius, as the tragic hero in Julius Caesar, had a great internal conflict on whether it was the right choice. 

This essay will discuss Anagorisis, Peripeteia, and Nemesis. Three Aristotelian concepts meaning an important discovery made by the tragic hero, a reversal of the hero’s fate, and a punishment the hero feels they cannot avoid, respectively. The assassination of Caesar by Cassius, Brutus and the other Senators will be referred to as the conspiracy, and the perpetrators the conspirators.

Cassius’ important discovery, came during the coinciding events of strange signs and wonders 

Bartholomew 2 

and the gradual accumulation of power by Caesar. Although Cassius decided that these events could be related and that he should not let Caesar accumulate power for himself. He did not have any more reason than Brutus, they both relied on a what-if scenario, both doubted 
Caesar had tyranny in his ethos. The author believes Cassius decision was made as a result of envy of the power and name Caesar had made for himself.  

Caesar’s deliberate building up of power and influence among the Roman Plebeians was likely a cause of friction between him and the Patrician Senators. They very likely felt that Caesar would upset the status-quo by giving more power and money to the people and they wanted to keep all the power in Rome they could to themselves. “And why should Caesar be a tyrant then? Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf. But that he sees the Romans are but sheep. He were no lion were not Romans hinds. Those that with haste will make a mighty fire. Begin it with weak straws. What trash is Rome What rubbish and what offal, when it serves For the base matter to illuminate. So vile a thing as Caesar!” - 1.III.105-112. As Cassius says, Caesar was an insult to the spirit of the Roman people. Cassius thought that a virtuous man should not be so welcoming of such a demagogue as Caesar.

The conspiracy is started by Cassius, recruiting Brutus and the other Senators. They band together and make a pledge. The Senators invite Caesar to the Senate, making him think that they have a message of good news for him, they succeed in drawing Caesar to the Senate and killing him. The reputation and fate of the conspirators is potentially one of glory, having committed a 

Bartholomew 3

necessary deed to save the Republic from the demagoguery of Caesar. But this is where their fates turn to the worst, most notably Cassius and Brutus.

Cassius’ turn of fate is largely effected by his agreeableness with the changes in plan made by Brutus. Brutus biggest flaw contributing to the downfall of the conspiracy was that he was excessively fair and merciful. When the conspirators gather at Brutus’ house, he dissuades them from inviting Cicero to join them in their conspiracy, effecting further, vital decisions. His second decision was showing mercy on Antony and sparing his life, even with the pleading of Antony for his life to be taken alongside that of his friend and confidante. Later as history reports, Cicero remarked that Rome was subjected to  tyranny because the conspirators failed to assassinate Antony. The last and most vital decision Brutus made was when he decided to give up their military advantage and march to Philippi to meet the ghost of Caesar. Although Cassius started the conspiracy, Brutus took it over and spoiled it.

The conspirators have the advantage militarily in the play but Shakespeare uses a Deus ex machina to finish up the story. This device comes in the form of Caesars ghost visiting Brutus, The ghost tells Brutus that he has come “To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philipi.” Act 4.3.15 Cassius feels like he will face an unavoidable punishment for orchestrating the death of Caesar and kills himself. Antony and Octavian say this as an answer to their prayers and remarked, “Now, Antony, our prayers have been answered. You said the enemy wouldn’t come down but keep to the hills and upper regions. It seems not. Their forces are nearby. They intend to 

Bartholomew 4

challenge us here at Philippi, responding to our challenge before we’ve even challenged him.” - 5.1.1-5

At the end of their lives Cassius and Brutus see their missions and being hopeless and come to the mutual understanding that they will never see each other again, and bid their farewells. Cassius denouement comes when he decides that he cannot escape the consequences of the conspiracy he made against Caesar and his slave Pindarus kills him upon request to gain his freedom. Cassius last words signified the nemesis of his consequences “Caesar, you are revenged with the very same sword that killed you.” 5.3.49-50
	
I believe Cassius was a cunning, wise military commander and political figure. His downfall came from his envy of the power and position of Caesar and his tragic flaw of giving up too easily. I very much enjoyed the play of Julius Caesar. Reading through it made me learn things I never knew about the lives of Cassius, Brutus and Antony. I believe that Rome was better off under the reign of Augustus and may have been comparably prosperous under the reign of Caesar. Some interesting fact about late Rome was that the First Triumvirate were not the three main leaders of Rome, but were an informal alliance, bent on taking over the Roman Republic. The actual rulers of the late Roman Republic were the two Roman Consuls. Also the people never tried to have Caesar elected king, because Rome had a long proud history of being a republic. This is why Augustus named himself commander or in Latin “imperator”, which is where we get the word Emperor from.